document query syntax for the orchestrator explorer (#21644)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/infrastructure/containers/orchestrator_explorer.md

{{< img src="infrastructure/livecontainers/orch_ex_resource_utilization_sorted_column.png" alt="Container Resource Utilization Sorted Columns" style="width:50%;">}}

## Query filter details

You can narrow down the displayed resources by supplying a query within the "Filter by" search bar on the top left of the page.

### Syntax

A query filter is composed of terms and operators. Example:

{{< img src="infrastructure/livecontainers/orch_syntax.png" alt="Orchestrator Explorer query filter syntax." style="width:80%;">}}

#### Terms

There are multiple types of terms available:

| Type | Examples |
|---|---|

> | **Tags**: Attached to resources by [the agent collecting them](https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/tagging/assigning_tags/?tab=containerizedenvironments). There are also additional tags that Datadog generates for Kubernetes resources. | `datacenter:staging`<br>`tag#datacenter:staging`<br>*(the `tag#` is optional)* |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Tags**: Attached to resources by [the agent collecting them](https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/tagging/assigning_tags/?tab=containerizedenvironments). There are also additional tags that Datadog generates for Kubernetes resources. | `datacenter:staging`<br>`tag#datacenter:staging`<br>*(the `tag#` is optional)* |
```

Ah I missed all the links in this table/section, need to be annotated as mentioned before : https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/docs4docs/pages/1182958054/Markdown#Links

  - Pods
  - Nodes (Internal and External)
  - Services (Cluster, External, and Load Balancer IPs)

This means that you do not need to specify a key to search for a resource by name, or IP.

#### Operators

To combine multiple terms into a complex query, you can use any of the following case sensitive Boolean operators:

| Operator | Description | Example |
|---|---|---|
| `AND` | **Intersection**: both terms are in the selected events (if nothing is added, AND is taken by default) | `a AND b`   |
| `OR` | **Union**: either term is contained in the selected events                                             | `a OR b`   |
| `NOT` / `-` | **Exclusion**: the following term is NOT in the event (apply to each individual raw text search) | `a AND NOT b` or<br>`a AND -b` |
|  `( )` | **Grouping:** specify how to group terms logically. | `a AND (b OR c)` or<br>`(a AND b) or c` |

### Wildcards

You can use `*` wildcards as part of a term value to filter by partial matches. Some examples:

- `kube_job:stats-*`: Find all resources with a `kube_deployment` tag value starting with `stats-`
- `pod_name:*canary`: Find all resources with a `pod_name` value ending in `canary`

> - `kube_deployment:*writer*cell-2`: Find resources with `writer` in the middle of the value, ending with `cell-2`

Reviewer 2: this one example feels a bit specific 😬 could we change to something more generic? like `kube_deployment:*stat*canary`

- `label#release:*`: Find all resources with a `release` label, regardless of its value

>  ***Note:** There is no limit to the number, or the location of, wildcards in your key values. You cannot use wild cards within the key name however.*

> ### Autocomplete

Reviewer 2: not sure if we need to detail this (the logs docs is not)

Author: they do, kind of
https://docs.datadoghq.com/logs/explorer/search/#autocomplete

The logs search bar links to "Search Syntax":
https://docs.datadoghq.com/logs/explorer/search_syntax/

But other products, like the service catalog, link to "Search Logs":
https://docs.datadoghq.com/logs/explorer/search/

but I could also be convinced to get rid of it, it doesn't seem super helpful.

|  `( )` | **Grouping:** specify how to group terms logically. | `a AND (b OR c)` or<br>`(a AND b) or c` |

##### `OR` Value Shorthand

Multiple terms sharing the same key can be combined into a single term if they are all `OR`ed. For example, this query:

```
app_name:web-server OR app_name:database OR app_name:event-consumer
```

Can be reduced to:

```
app_name:(web-server OR database OR event-consumer)
```

### Wildcards

You can use `*` wildcards as part of a term to filter by partial matches, both for values and keys! Some examples:

- `kube_job:stats-*`: Find all resources with a `kube_deployment` tag value starting with `stats-`
- `pod_name:*canary`: Find all resources with a `pod_name` value ending in `canary`
- `label#release:*`: Find all resources with a `release` label, regardless of its value
- `-label#*.datadoghq.com/*`: Find resources that do not have any Datadog-scoped labels.
- `kube_*:*stats*canary`: Find resource with a related-resource tags (`kube_*`), with with  `stats` in the middle of the value, also ending with `canary`.

### Extracted Tags

> In addition to the tags you have [configured](https://docs.datadoghq.com/getting_started/tagging/assigning_tags/?tab=containerizedenvironments) within your Datadog agent, Datadog injects generated tags based on resource attributes that can help your searching and grouping needs. These tags are added to resources conditionally, when they are relevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the tags you have [configured][20] within your Datadog agent, Datadog injects generated tags based on resource attributes that can help your searching and grouping needs. These tags are added to resources conditionally, when they are relevant.
```
Can you change this link to the format noted here: https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/docs4docs/pages/1182958054/Markdown#Links

So for example it would be : 

`[configured][20]` 

then at the bottom of the markdown file:
[20]: /getting_started/tagging/assigning_tags/?tab=containerizedenvironments

(or a number not yet in use).

> #### All Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### All resources
```

> All resources will have the `kube_cluster_name` tag and all namespaced resources have the `kube_namespace` tag added to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All resources have the `kube_cluster_name` tag and all namespaced resources have the `kube_namespace` tag added to them.
```

> They will also have a `kube_<api_kind>:<metadata.name>` tag. For example, a deployment named `web-server-2` would have the `kube_deployment:web-server-2` tag automatically added to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, resources contain a `kube_<api_kind>:<metadata.name>` tag. For example, a deployment named `web-server-2` would have the `kube_deployment:web-server-2` tag automatically added.
```

> > ***Note**: There are some exceptions to this pattern:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: There are some exceptions to this pattern:
```
Suggest to remove italicized here as well.

>

> > - Pods use `pod_name` instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Pods use `pod_name` instead.
```

> > - *VPAs: `verticalpodautoscaler`*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - *VPAs: `verticalpodautoscaler`*.
```

> > - *VPHs: `horizontalpodautoscaler`*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - *VPHs: `horizontalpodautoscaler`*.
```

> > - *Persistant Volume Claims: `persistantvolumeclaim`*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - *Persistant Volume Claims: `persistantvolumeclaim`*.
```

Based on the labels attached to the resource, the following tags will also be extracted:

| Tag | Source Label |
|---|---|
| `kube_app_name` | `app.kubernetes.io/name` |
| `kube_app_instance` | `app.kubernetes.io/instance` |
| `kube_app_version` | `app.kubernetes.io/version` |
| `kube_app_component` | `app.kubernetes.io/component` |
| `kube_app_part_of` | `app.kubernetes.io/part-of` |
| `kube_app_managed_by` | `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by` |
| `env` | `tags.datadoghq.com/env` |
| `version` | `tags.datadoghq.com/version` |
| `service` | `tags.datadoghq.com/service` |

#### Relationships

Related Resources will be tagged with eachother. Some examples:

> - A Pod that is part of the "XYZ" Deployment will have a `kube_deployment:xyz` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A pod that is part of the "XYZ" deployment will have a `kube_deployment:xyz` tag.
```

- An Ingress that points at Service "A" will have a `kube_service:a` tag.

> Resources that are spawned from "parent" resources will have the `kube_ownerref_kind` and `kube_ownerref_name` tags (such as Pods and Jobs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resources that are spawned from "parent" resources will have the `kube_ownerref_kind` and `kube_ownerref_name` tags (such as pods and jobs).
```

> > **Tip:** Utilize the filter query autocomplete feature to discover what related-resource tags are available. Type `kube_` and see what results are suggested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Tip:** Utilize the filter query autocomplete feature to discover what related resource tags are available. Type `kube_` and see what results are suggested.
```

{{< img src="infrastructure/livecontainers/orch_ex_resource_utilization_sorted_column.png" alt="Container Resource Utilization Sorted Columns" style="width:50%;">}}

## Query Filter Details

You can narrow down the displayed resources by supplying a query within the "Filter by" search bar on the top left of the page.

### Syntax

> A query filter is composed of terms and operators.

Reviewer 3: It might be helpful for a user to have visual understanding of these concepts, as you mention these many times in the rest of the doc

Something simple, like

<img width="654" alt="image" src="https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/assets/1636933/476c6503-9804-4a45-a212-30e10d2d52ee">

Author: great idea :)

- `kube_*:*stats*canary`: Find resource with a related-resource tags (`kube_*`), with with  `stats` in the middle of the value, also ending with `canary`.

### Autocomplete

As you build your filter query, our autocomplete drop down will help you fill in the blanks. The filter query autocomplete drop down is composed of 3 parts:

| Section | Description|
|---|---|
| **Facet Keys** | These suggestions will help you find, or finish typing available keys on the resources you are currently filteing. The suggestions are based on keys that are most abundent across your currently selected resources. This section only appears if you are just starting to enter a new search term, or are still typing a facet key. Once you begin typing the value portion of a search term it will be hidden. |
| **Facets** | These recommendations will be full term suggestions based on the prevelance of the facet on the currently found resources, and whatever you have already typed. |
| **Recent Seearches** | These are the most recent full queries you have used to filter your resources, allowing you to quickly navigate back to a past filter query. |

> >  ***Note**: For both Facet Key and Facet recommnations, you will see the type of facet being recommended in grey text at the end: Tag, Label, or Annotation.*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
>  ***Note**: For both Facet Key and Facet recommendations, you will see the type of facet being recommended in grey text at the end: Tag, Label, or Annotation.*
```
